
The term Anti-conformism has been defined as when a human seeks to "spit in society's face, doing things just to shock or spite them." It is unknown when the term first came to be used in society, but the term can be confused with "non-conformism". The etymology of the actual word reveals that the first section of the word is the Greek anti- (αντι), meaning "against" or "instead of"; whilst the second part of the term, conformist, can be traced back to the Old French (O.Fr.) word "conformer", meaning to "make or be similar".

==Definition==
Anti-conformism is a philosophy which actively rejects conformity. Anti-conformists are not merely individualists, but more so, believe that conformity is responsible for many of the world's ills and problems. Anti-conformists usually equate the pressure to conform to social norms with a form of cultural bigotry and therefore champion a free-spirited individualism that attempts to rid him or herself of all vestiges of socially-based desires and characteristics.

The Anticonformism is the opposite of conformity. We use this word to describe the attitude of opposition to it, even hostility to the standards, of the established practices.

The Standard, from the Latin norma (square, ruler), functions as a model, reference, or even a rule. It corresponds to the usual state, consistent with the majority of cases. So it means the average, normal .

Any individual who, in society, deviates from the norm, and is often considered abnormal, and sometimes even deviant. In this regard, Andre Gide(French writer of the twentieth century) writes:

"Every non-compliant thought is suspect." Suspect in the eyes of those who conform precisely to a standard of thought and often behavioral standard. These individuals end up resembling, as their desire to imitate is huge. And Marcel, the Conformist hero in Alberto Moravia's book (1951), is delighted to be like everyone else.

The Anticonformist is often an individualist, derived from the Latin word dividere, which means to "split", "separate". It is "separated" from the mass, from his environment, because he does not comply with the models laid down by the majority. The nonconformist therefore declined to be the one that he should be. He asserts his originality: indeed, the nonconformist wants to innovate, invent.

True artists are almost all anticonformists, We should think about of the Romantic artists of the early nineteenth century, the Impressionist painters who opposed then by their creative freedom, the aesthetic standards of academic painting. And, closer to us, the surrealist movement which has deeply influenced the years 1920-1930.

But if conformity favors, one can guess, social integration, non-conformist is sometimes a source of mistrust, (see quote from Andre Gide above); hostility or exclusion of the representatives of the standard, of the order.
Even if a anticonformist, might be seen as a resistant, or a rebel, the philosopher Pascal Bruckner points out in "the conformism of subversion", the systematic critique of modern society and, more particularly, of the liberal system, the advertising and media, with whom he is in affinity, becomes a conformist upside down, a new way, just as excessive and ridiculous, to be the part of the herd. Pierre Bourdieu also emphasized that conformity and homogenization of thought is conveyed in most media.

==References==


