

Memory conformity refers to when people share information after a certain event, their memories become more similar to each others' than if they had not had shared social interaction. The influence of others has a strong impact in the retrieval process of memories. The influence altered by many factors, such as power and confidence. The influence can cause memories to be partially or entirely false. Memory conformity is prominent in situations like social interaction, media broadcasting, and eyewitness testimony. Much research and many studies have observed this phenomenon; however, the biological process is very much a mystery. Although, the memories are speculated to malfunction within the amygdala and hippocampus. 

As an example, a 2003 study showed that people who have social interaction after a certain event is more likely to have their thoughts persuaded into something other than what they actually witnessed – 60% of participants reported findings that they couldn't have possibly witnessed. This is part of research focusing on social influences on memory.

A study in 2009 reevaluates the potency or strength of the memory conformity effect by having two groups of individuals watch a crime video, after which some participants learned details not witnessed in the video (this was dyad group). They read the other participant's report (known as the read group), or simply watching another version of the video (both-video group). In the first experiment,these participants often reported events not witnessed details, but on a source-judgment test, where the details were from the actual source, rather than the video also the dyad group was not any more likely than to read or both-video groups to report events not witnessed details. In the second experiment, participants were discouraged from using the details that were remembered from the secondary source only. What did all of this prove? That post warning instructions substantially reduced the memory conformity effect, and the first group (dyad group) was not more likely than a read group to report witnessed details. By encouraging the read group, source monitoring at test can reduce the negative consequences of co-witness collaboration.

== Notes ==
==References==
*Wilson, Krissy. French, Christopher C. "Memory Conformity and Paranormal Belief." parapsych.org. Parapsychological Association. 2004. Web. 1 Oct. 2011.


