
Public displays of affection (PDA or PDOA) are acts of physical intimacy in the view of others. What are acceptable displays of affection vary between cultures as well as to time and context. Which acts are acceptable have also varied over time. Displays of affection in a public place, such as the street, are more likely to be objected to, than similar practices in a private place with only people from a similar cultural background present. Maintaining eye contact can be regarded socially and psychologically as analogous to touching in some cultures.

In some contexts, such as in bars, nightclubs, and strip clubs, more extreme forms of physical intimacy are sometimes acceptable. In these places, acts such as grinding and french kissing are common, but acts of a sexual nature, such as frotteurism and groping, are normally unacceptable physical contact. Physical contact is common during couple dancing, but acts of physical intimacy are normally avoided. It is traditional at the conclusion of a Western wedding for the couple to kiss. 

If the partners enjoy being seen affectionate towards each other in public, it may be considered a mild form of exhibitionism. Alternatively, the partners may be indifferent that others see them, and therefore not inhibited by it. Finally, the partners may prefer more privacy, but may simply tolerate being seen by others. Some may find it pleasant to view others public displays of affection, which may be considered a form of voyeurism.

== Worldwide ==
In most of the Western world, such as Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the United States, it is very common to see people holding hands, hugging and kissing in public. In nightclubs, it is also common for people to "grind" (a form of dancing) or dance closely.

In Latin America, Italy, France or Spain the practice of teenagers gathering in public parks to kiss, caress or even have oral sex has caught the attention of United States media, strikingly because of the lack of political content in this "sexual awakening".

In South Africa, it is against the law for anyone under the age of 16 to take part in a public displays of affection. This has led to large protests across the country by teenagers, culminating in kiss-a-thons in public places across the country.

In India, public display of affection is a growing phenomenon, although stray incidents of police harassment of couples were reported in the past. However, relaxation of previous generations' social norms has made public displays of affection more common among India's younger lot.

==Social media==
With social media sites such as Facebook forming an important medium of communication in recent times, public displays of affection have also become commonplace on the Internet. These digitized displays of affection are often text and emoticon based.

==References==


