
The teaching-family model is a model of care for troubled youth used internationally in group homes, treatment foster care, schools, home-based treatment, and other youth and dependent adult care programs. It was developed in the 1960s through research at the University of Kansas. Researchers included Montrose Wolf, PhD (the inventor of time-out as a learning tool to shape behavior) and Gary Timbers, PhD. The model has been replicated over 800 times, although not all of the replications have proven effective and successful.

This model of care is based on an "organized approach to providing humane, effective, and individualized services that are satisfactory to clients and consumers. It is cost effective and replicable." (from Teaching-Family Association Website) The focus is using scientifically proven methods of behaviorism known as applied behavior analysis and sometimes known as behavior modification to teach and reinforce pro-social skills and allow the individual to maintain or advance in his or her environment.

Many programs across the U.S. use this model of care, including Certified sites such as Kenosha Human Development Services, Inc., Appalachian Family Innovations, Virginia Home for Boys and Girls, The Barium Springs Home For Children, Closer To Home Calgary, Alberta, Canada, and Utah Youth Village. Sites are either Certified (Sponsor Agencies), Developing Agencies, or Supportive sites. Developing agencies like Children's Village and The Children's Home of Cincinnati undergo extensive evaluation by a Sponsor Agency before becoming a Certified Agency. Supportive agencies like Youth Quest Inc. may use the Teaching-Family Model but have not undergone evaluation due to company size or funding restrictions. 

The Teaching-Family Association (TFA) is an international organization founded in 1975 to promote this model of care. More information can be found on their website.

==Research==
Many years of research exist on the Teaching-Family Model. In general research supports the use of Teaching-Family Homes to reducing recidivism while in program and some suggestion that it reduces post-programming. The Teaching-Family Model has been suggested as a model program for residential treatment facility and behavior modification facility.

==References==
==See also==
* Behavior modification facility

==Resources==
* Teaching-Family Association
* Closer To Home Calgary, Alberta, Canada

