The Yale Attitude Change Approach, also known as The Yale Attitude Change Model, is the social psychology study of the conditions under which people are most likely to change their attitudes in response to persuasive messages. This approach to persuasive communications was first studied by Carl Hovland and his colleagues at Yale University, and thus was known later on as The Yale Attitude Change Approach. The basic paradigm of this approach can be described as “who said what to whom”—the source of the communication, the nature of the communication, and the nature of the audience. There are many factors and effects that come into play in each of the components of a persuasive communication, according to this approach. For instance, the credibility and attractiveness of the communicator (who), the quality and sincerity of the message (what), and the attention, intelligence and age of the audience (whom) can all influence the effects of the audience’s perceived attitude change through a persuasive communication.

The Yale Attitude Change Approach has generated a great deal of research, and insight, into the nature of persuasion. This approach has helped not only social psychologists to understand the process of persuasion, but also companies in making their marketing and advertising strategies more effective. Like most other theories about persuasion and attitude change, this approach is not perfect. Rather than being a systematic theory about persuasive communications, this approach is more of a general framework within which the research was conducted. The researchers at Yale did not specify the levels of importance among different factors of a persuasive message; instead they emphasized more on analyzing the aspects of attitude change rather than comparing them. 

==Major theoretical approaches==

The Yale Attitude Change Approach is a method to making persuasive communications effective—a study started by Carl Hovland, based on his experiences during World War II while attempting to boost morale in U.S. soldiers. This study focused on both communication-bound predispositions to accept or reject certain types of appeals and unbound attributes such as the general tendencies to particular responses to all communications. The Yale group developed a general theoretical structure linking individual attributes and persuasion based on three major factors: the source of the communication, the nature of the communication, and the nature of the audience.

The Yale Attitude Change Approach has a similar structure to 4th century B.C. Greek philosopher Aristotle’s concept of persuasion as seen in his work "Rhetoric". According to Aristotle, there are three means of persuasion: the character of the speaker, the emotional state of the listener, and logos, the argument itself. Contemporary psychologists take use both the Yale model’s psychological approach and Aristotle’s philosophical approach to examine more closely specific components of persuasion.

William McGuire was one of the first to further develop the Yale model in the late 1960s. McGuire emphasized the importance of reception, the attention and comprehension stages of the Yale group, and yielding, the anticipation and critical evaluation steps, in his study of individual differences in influenceability. He predicted ability and motivational attributes to be positively related to reception. For example, people of high intelligence have the necessary cognitive skills to comprehend the speaker’s message. Similarly, people of high self-esteem are more socially engaged and less anxious or distracted, facilitating attention to and comprehension of the message. Conversely, he found that yielding to persuasion required the opposite attributes. People of low intelligence and low self-esteem are more likely to change their opinions after receiving a message. Therefore people of middle-range intelligence and self-esteem seemed to be the most easily persuaded as they were most likely to both receive and yield to the message.

The Elaboration likelihood model is a more contemporary approach to persuasion, stemming from the Yale Attitude Change Approach. Developed by R.E. Petty and J.T. Cacioppo in the late 1980s, this model explains two ways in which persuasive communications can cause attitude change: centrally and peripherally. The central route to persuasion occurs when people have both the ability and the motivation to listen to a message and think about the arguments. The peripheral route to persuasion occurs when people are swayed not by the argument itself, but by things secondary to the message such as the length of the communication or the attractiveness of the communicator.

Martin Bauer takes a slightly different approach to the Yale Attitude Change Approach. In 2008, Bauer argues that persuasion cannot only focus on the social influence on intersubjectivity, the sharing of subjective states by two or more individuals, but must also include the idea of inter-objectivity, the understandings that are shared between individuals about social reality. Using the idea of the ‘fait accompli’, a completed and irreversibly ‘done deal’, he explores artifacts such as nuclear power, information technology, and genetic engineering as types of social influence.

==Major empirical findings==

Much of the research concerning the influence of external factors on an individual’s attitude focuses on their applications to marketing strategies. Studies have been done that examine the factors surrounding the sender of the message, the channel and the recipient. These have revealed that source credibility, communicator attractiveness, message context and mood all affect the attitude changes.

===In marketing===
Depicted in the article, “Prepurchase Attribute Verifiability, Source Credibility, and Persuasion,” a study done by Shailendra Jain and Steven Posavac examines the roles that factors surrounding the origin of a message play in likelihood that the recipient will believe the message conveyed by an advertisement. Specifically, they examined advertisements for mountain bikes and cameras. They surveyed the consumers on their overall reaction to search claims, which are claims that can be statistically proved, and experience claims, which are testimonials. They also compared the credibility of the claims.

Eighty-one MBA students, 62 men and 19 women, were shown advertisements for the each of the two products. The participants were asked questions concerning the advertisements, which either showed a search claim or an experience claim. The search claim for the mountain bike was its weight and the experience claim was its ease of control. The search claim for the camera was its compactness and the experience claim was the quality of pictures that it took.

The ratings for the believability of the mountain bike ads were 5.8 with a search claim with high credibility, 5.3 for a search claim with low credibility, 5.7 for an experience claim with high credibility and 3.2 for an experience claim with low credibility. The ratings for the believability of the camera ads were 5.9 with a search claim with high credibility, 5.7 for a search claim with low credibility, 5.5 for an experience claim with high credibility and 4.7 for an experience claim with low credibility.

The results showed that customers were more likely to believe and be satisfied with claims if they thought the source was trustworthy or had some kind of expertise with the product. They also were more likely to believe advertisements with concrete evidence behind claims, such as the weight of the bike or the compactness of the camera. This experiment shows that the overall credibility of a source correlates with its ability to persuade an individual.

===In persuasion===

According to the article "An Attribution Analysis of Communicator Characteristics on Opinion Change: the Case of Communicator Attractiveness", another study done by Alice Eagly and Shelly Chaiken examines the effects of attractiveness and message content on persuasion. They surveyed undergraduate students on communicators’ attractiveness and whether or not they were persuaded to take the speaker's position, whether desirable or undesirable, on a topic. They were also asked to predict the speaker’s positions before hearing their message.

The study was done on 358 undergraduate students were shown photos of an individual and asked to determine, solely based on looks, which position they would take on a given issue. The students were more likely to pair attractive people with desirable positions on any given issue. They were also more likely to be persuaded by attractive speakers to take an undesirable position on a topic than by an unattractive speaker. However, they were equally as likely to be persuaded to take a desirable position on a topic by both attractive and unattractive speakers.

The results showed that participants were more likely to agree with attractive speakers in general, but also more likely to agree with any speaker discussing a desirable position on a topic. This reveals that more attractive individuals are more persuasive than individuals perceived to be less attractive. It also shows that message content is important in believability; more desirable messages are more believable than undesirable messages.

==Controversies==

One of the main controversies with the Yale Attitude Change Approach is the fact that it is strictly functional—its focus is mainly on the resulting change in attitude and the processing of information that goes with it. However, other scholars see persuasion as a function of “communication, social influence, and group processes” and take other factors into account like social influence and the media. These are the factors that the following theories are based upon.

A theory proposed by Margarita Sanchez-Mazas focuses on peoples’ desire to obtain social recognition and dignity. In this model, persuasion is seen as a way to overcome social injustices and achieve recognition and dignity. Sanchez-Mazas examines the roles of majorities and minorities in creating social change and believes “persuasion is a simultaneous, reciprocal process between groups, and specifically between majorities and minorities”.

Another model of persuasion developed by Clelia Nascimento-Schulze emphasizes the communicative aspects within a complex society. She discusses how technology and the media are used to promote science among developing countries. It was determined that the Internet was the most successful at transferring scientific knowledge to the public because it contains the perfect amount of visual information and combines art and science in a creative and informative way. A key point in this theory is the existence of an “interactive society” which is represented by the technology that allows various communities to gather under common values and beliefs such as the internet.

Another form of public persuasion studied by Helene Joffe emphasizes how the media produces visual stimuli that elicit feelings of fear, empathy, or even disgust. This theory highlights the major role that technology has in eliciting certain emotions and feelings in individuals. The study focuses on advertising campaigns such as health, safety, and charity ads. The main argument is that visual stimuli lure in an audience and bring them into a “state of emotion”. Joffe believes that providing some kind of visual gives a different viewpoint to a statistic and gives it meaning.

==Conclusions==

Future research in persuasion is considering the effects of the unconscious. Scholars are starting to explore the possibilities of “priming in inducing non-conscious effects”. This idea is new to social psychology and is beginning to shed some light on the relationship between the unconscious of the individual and the social environment. The study of persuasion has always been an integral part of social psychology. However, the focus is slowly moving away from attitude change and behavior modification and beginning to apply to other subjects like communications, literature, art, and other humanities.

== References ==

== External links ==
* "Persuasion" by William L. Benoit, Ph.D. 



